# Output Reports

CSE report data is accumulated during simulation and written to the report file at the end of the run. Some reports are generated by default and cannot be turned off. There are a set of predefined reports which may be requested in the input. The user may also define custom reports which include many CSE internal variables. Reports may accumulate data on an a variety of frequencies including subhourly, hourly, daily, monthly, and annual (run) intervals.

## Units

The default units for CSE reports are:

---

Energy mBtu, millions of Btu (to convert to kWh divide by 292)
Temperature degrees Farenheit
Air Flow cfm (cubic feet per minute)

---

## Time

Hourly reports show hour 1 through 24 where hour 1 includes the time period from midnight to 1 AM. By default, CSE specifies that January first is a Thursday and the simulation occurs on a non-leap year. Daylight savings is in effect from the second Sunday of March on which CSE skips hour 3 until the first Sunday of November when CSE simulates 25 hours. These calendar defaults can be modified as required.

## METER Reports

A Meter Report displays the energy use of a METER object, a user-defined "device" that records energy consumption of equipment as simulated by CSE. CSE allows the user to define as many meters as desired and to assign any energy using device to any meter.

Meters account for energy use in pre-defined categories, called _end uses, that are documented with METER._

## Air Flow Meter Report

An Air Flow Meter Report displays air flow values accumulated by an AFMETER that is associated with one or more ZONEs. The report provides insight into the results of the AirNet pressure model.

AFMETER maintains values for subhour, hour, day, month, and year intervals. Values are standard cfm (0.075 lb/ft3). Values for intervals longer than subhour are averages.

Flows are categorized by 1) direction of flow (+ = into zone(s), - = out of zone(s)); IZXFER izAFCat tags; and 3) type of source or sink of the flow (ambient, unconditioned zone, conditioned zone).

The following items are displayed (using the abbreviations shown in the report headings). The "+/-" notation indicates that two columns are included, one for each direction of flow. For example, "InfX+/-" means the report includes columns "InfX+" (infiltration flows into the zone) and "InfX-" (infiltration flows out of the zone).

---

Tot+/- Total flows

Unkn+/- Uncategorized flows (generally this shows 0)

InfX+/- Infiltration flows from/to ambient (izAFCat = InfilEx)

VntX+/- Natural vent exchanges from/to ambient (izAFCat = VentEx)

FanX+/- Forced vent and DOAS flows to/from ambient (izAFCat = FanEx)

InfU+/- Infiltration flows from/to unconditioned zones (izAFCat = InfilIz)

VntU+/- Natural vent flows from/to unconditioned zones (izAFCat = VentIz)

FanU+/- Forced vent flows from/to unconditioned zones (izAFCat = FanIz)

InfC+/- Infiltration flows from/to conditioned zones (izAFCat = InfilIz)

VntC+/- Natural vent flows from/to conditioned zones (izAFCat = VentIz)

FanC+/- Forced vent flows from/to conditioned zones (izAFCat = FanIz)

Duct+/- Duct leakage flows

HVAC+/- HVAC air flows at zone (i.e. at registers)

---

## Energy Balance Report

The Energy Balance Report displays the temperature and sensible and latent heat flows into and out of the air of a single zone. Sign conventions assume that a positive flow increases the air temperature. Heat flow from a warm mass element such as a concrete wall into the zone air is defined as a positive flow, heat flow from air into mass is negative. Solar gain into the zone is defined as a positive heat flow. Solar gain that is incident on and absorbed directly into a mass element is shown as both a positve in the SOLAR column (gain to the zone) and a negative in the MASS column (lost from the zone to the mass).

In a real building zone energy and moisture flows must balance due to the laws of physics. CSE uses approximate solutions for the energy and moisture balances and displays the net balance which is a measure of internal calculation error.

The following items are displayed (using the abbreviations shown in the report headings):

---

Tair Air temperature in the zone (since CSE uses combined films
this is technically the effective temperature and includes
radiant effects).

WBair Wet Bulb temperature in the zone.

Cond Heat flow through light weight surfaces from or to the
outdoors.

InfS Sensible infiltration heat flow from outdoors.

Slr Solar gain through glazing (net) and solar gains absorbed by
light surfaces and transmitted into the zone air.

IgnS Sensible internal gains from lights, equipment, people, etc.

Mass Net heat flow to (negative) and from (positive) the mass
elements of the zone.

Izone Net heat flows to other zones in the building.

MechS Net heat flows from heating, cooling and ventilation.

BALS The balance (error) calculated by summing the sensible gains
and losses.

InfL Latent infiltration heat flow.

IgnL Latent internal gains.

AirL Latent heat absorbed (negative) or released (positive) by
changes in the room air moisture content.

MechL Latent heat added or removed by cooling or ventilation.

BalL The balance (error) calculated by summing the sensible gains
and losses.

---

## Air Handler Load Report

The Air Handler Load Report displays conditions and loads at the peak load hours for the air handler for a single zone. The following items are displayed:

---

PkVf Peak flow (cfm) at supply fan
VfDs Supply fan design flow (same as peak for E10 systems)
PkQH Peak heat output from heating coil.
Hcapt Rated capacity of heat coil

---

The rest are about the cooling coil. Most of the columns are values at the time of peak part load ratio (plr). Note that, for example, the peak sensible load is the sensible load at the time of peak part load ratio, even if there was a higher sensible load at another time when the part load ratio was smaller.

---

PkMo Month of cooling coil peak plr, 1-12

Dy Day of month 1-31 of peak

Hr Hour of day 1-24 of cooling coil peak plr.

Tout Outdoor drybulb temperature at time of cooling coil peak plr.

Wbou Outdoor wetbulb similarly

Ten Cooling coil entering air temperature at time of peak plr.

Wben Entering wetbulb similarly

Tex Exiting air temperature at plr peak

         WbexExiting air wetbulb similarly

-PkQs Sensible load at time of peak plr, shown positive.

-PkQl Latent load likewise

-PkQC Total load -- sum of PkQs and PkQl

CPlr Peak part load ratio: highest fraction of coil's capacity used,
reflecting both fraction of maximum output under current
conditions used when on and fraction of the time the fan is on.
The maximum output under actual conditions can vary considerably
from the rated capacity for DX coils. The fraction of maximum
output used can only be 1.0 if the sensible and total loads
happen to occur in the same ratio as the sensible and total
capacities. The time the fan is on can be less than 1.0 for
residential systems in which the fan cycles on with the
compressor. For example, if at the cooling peak the coil ran at
.8 power with the fan on .9 of the time, a CPlr of .72 would be
reported. The preceding 12 columns are values at the time this
peak occured.

Ccapt Cooling coil rated total capacity

Ccaps Rated sensible capacity.

---

## Air Handler Report

The Air Handler Load Report displays conditions and heat flows in the air handler for the time period specified. It is important to note that the air handler report only accumulates data if the air handler is on during an hour. The daily and monthly values are averages of the hours the air handler was on and DO NOT INCLUDE OFF HOUR VALUES. The following items are displayed:

---

Tout Outdoor drybulb temperature during hours the air handler was
on.

Wbou Outdoor wetbulb temperature similarly.

Tret Return air dry bulb temperature during hours the air handler
was on before return duct losses or leaks.

Wbre Return air wetbulb similarly

po Fraction outside air including economizer damper leakage, but
not return duct leakage.

Tmix Mixed air dry bulb temperature -- after return air combined
with outside air; after return fan, but before supply fan and
coil(s).

Wbmi Mixed air wet bulb temperature, similarly.

Tsup Supply air dry bulb temperature to zone terminals -- after
coil(s) and air handler supply duct leak and loss; (without
in zone duct losses after terminals).

WBsu Supply air wet bulb temperature similarly.

HrsOn Hours during which the fan operated at least part of the
time.

FOn Fraction of the time the fan was on during the hours it
operated (HrsOn). CHECK FOR VAV, IS IT FLOW OR TIME

VF Volumetric flow, measured at mix point/supply fan/coils;
includes air that leaks out of supply duct and is thus non-0
even when zone terminals are taking no flow

Qheat Heat energy added to air stream by heat coil, if any,
MEASURED AT COIL not as delivered to zones (see Qload).

Qsens, Sensible, latent, and total heat added to air stream
Qlat and (negative values) by cooling coil, MEASURED AT COIL,
Qcool including heat cancelled by fan heat and duct losses, and
heat added to air lost through supply duct leak.

Qout Net heat taken from outdoor air. Sum of sensible and latent,
measured RELATIVE TO CURRENT RETURN AIR CONDITIONS.

Qfan Heat added to air stream by supply fan, plus return fan if
any -- but not relief fan..

Qloss Heat added to air stream by supply and return duct leaks and
conductive loss. Computed in each case as the sensible and
latent heat in the air stream relative to return air
conditions after the leak or loss, less the same value before
the leak or loss.

Qload Net energy delivered to the terminals -- Sensible and latent
energy, measured relative to return air conditions. INCLUDES
DUCT LOSSES after terminals; thus will differ from sum of
zone qMech's + qMecLat's.

Qbal Sum of all the 'Q' columns, primarily a development aid. Zero
indicates consistent and accurate computation; the normal
printout is something like .0000, indicating that the value
was too small to print in the space alloted, but not
precisely zero, due to computational tolerances and internal
round-off errors.

---
